-In the New Age
culture of today,
a common idea is that your
thoughts create your reality.
The truth is far
more complicated.
It seems as if we
exist in a world
where a huge amount
of reality has
already been created for us.
We can't just imagine
or wish it away.
We can see that a new world view
or a new paradigm is emerging.
This world view
integrates Western science
with the world's
mystical traditions.
Neuroscience is
learning a great deal
about the brain/mind system,
about how our thoughts
and emotions arise
in the brain, even
though the hard problem of
consciousness remains unsolved.
The New Age idea that our
thoughts change our reality
might actually be a
foreshadowing of a future state
of development where
we're able to integrate
extrasensory perception
into our world view.
At that point, rather than
breaking the laws of science,
the scientific world
view will have expanded
to include this awareness.
When we reach that
level, the new age will
no longer be a fringe culture.
Instead, it'll be the reality
in which everybody now lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
-Hello, folks.
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck.
Welcome to "Mindshift."
In today's episode,
we'll be talking
to two scholars of the
esoteric traditions
and Western and Eastern
forms of enlightenment,
Jay Michaelson and
Richard Smoley,
with Jay joining us first.
So thank you very much
for being here with us.
ANNOUNCER: Writer and vice
president of social justice
programs at the
Arcus Foundation,
Jay Michaelson is one
of the leading voices
on the complex relationships
between religion,
contemplative practice,
sexuality, and law.
He's written four
books-- "God vs. Gay:
The Religious Case
for Equality,"
"Everything is God: The Radical
Path of Non-dual Judaism,"
"Another Word for Sky:
Poems," and "God in Your Body:
Kabbalah, Mindfulness, and
Embodied Spiritual Practice."
On top of this, he is active
in the LGBT community,
founding Nehirim, and
fighting for the rights
of sexual minorities
in religious groups.
In 2009, "Forward" named him
in the list of the top 50
Most Influential Jews.
[APPLAUSE]
Hi, I'm Daniel Pinchbeck.
And we're here on "Mindshift"
with Jay Michaelson.
Good to see you, Jay.
And Jay has a new book coming
out, "Evolving Dharma."
So actually, I had a
little bit of a hand
in seeing this book
get out into the world
through Evolver Editions
at North Atlantic Books.
Tell us a little
bit about yourself
and your book, your new book.
-Sure.
The new book is
about the meditation
revolution, pro and con.
More people are practicing
meditation and mindfulness
in America now than
anywhere else on the planet
at any time in history.
And yet it's an opportunity
to really reflect about
how mindfulness is
being integrated or not
into corporations, into
prisons, into schools,
into the military, even,
and what that might
actually look like in practice.
And I also talk about the
shifts in practice that
can happen in one's own life.
So I talk a little bit
about my own long retreats
and my own years of
practice and some
of the dark nights that come
with the good times as well.
Do we have any statistics
as to what percentage
or how large a population is
exploring these practices?
The best numbers we
have is that one million
new Americans--
there are one million
Americans trying meditation
for the first time each year.
So it's a really explosive
growth, and mostly
in the health care context.
And I think the consensus is
that the next big studies are
econometric, not
neuroscientific.
Once we really can quantify
the decrease in health care
utilization that comes
from mindfulness practice,
this thing's ready to explode.
I mean, this will become
the financial incentive
to have folks do mindfulness
rather than utilize the health
care system is enormous.
Are you practicing
mindfulness right now?
I'm practicing
jokshan right now,
relaxing in pure awareness
while trying to have
a coherent conversation.
Awesome.
And how is the dharma evolving?
It really is shifting.
What does "dharma"
mean, actually?
So the word "dharma"
means "the way,"
and it's just how things are.
One of the most important
uses for me personally
is that one of the
points of practice
is to see everything
that's happening
as dharma and not self.
This is just this happening.
This is Daniel Danieling
and Jay Jaying.
And the dharma is
unfolding and rolling on.
So it's the way things are.
It's everything that is.
And obviously, specifically,
refers to the teachings
of the Buddha, an Indian prince
from the sixth century BC,
which later gave
birth to the kind
of meditation which is practiced
throughout the country.
And in the book, you kind
of question the whole concept
of enlightenment and you
note that the Buddha himself
never really used that term.
He talked about
awakening, right?
So how did we get
to enlightenment
and what does it mean today?
Well, as soon as the
dharma progressed out
of the monastery, it
became a religion.
It became a religious system.
And I think a lot of the
associations of meditation
with spirituality
come from that.
Really, I think
meditation is like a form
of contemplative fitness.
It's a thing you do.
It's a thing that
changes the brain.
And it's quite
mechanistic, actually,
and naturalistic
in its orientation.
But the notion that
enlightenment should be somehow
spooky and mysterious and
it's unattainable really
run afoul of what the
Buddha himself said,
which is that all
of us can do it.
You can do it.
I can do it.
And there's a whole
movement now called
the practical dharma
movement, which actually
kind of helps people along.
And I haven't become
fully enlightened,
but I've gotten to one of
the traditional milestones
along the way.
Which is?
There's, like, four of these
in the theravadan Buddhist
tradition, which I practice.
And I'm three quarters
diluted still.
What is the milestone
that you hit?
The milestone's
called stream entry.
You enter the stream
of the dharma.
And it's very common.
Anyone can do it.
I mean, I went on a
three month retreat,
and you get past these ordinary
steps through the practice.
And what I think is so
liberating about that
is it can actually give
you a map of where to go.
The map's not territory.
The recipe is not the meal.
You actually have
to do the practice.
But this kind of
more rationalistic,
practical approach
to the dharma for me
has been absolutely
life-changing.
How would we measure
contemplative fitness?
Do you look at in
terms of brain states,
like alpha states
and stuff like that?
Exactly.
I mean, there's
two ways, really--
behaviorally and
neuroscientifically.
So you can measure behavior
change-- how stressed are you
right now, versus
how stressed where
you before you
started meditating
or something like that.
Or immune response-- how fast
your body heals from disease.
And all this has been really
extensively documented.
The neuroscientific piece,
like what's actually happening
in the brain, I think, the
science is a little bit--
just a little younger.
We don't have quite the
level of analytical richness
around some of the data.
And so critics have called
it the new phrenology,
like measuring the
bumps on a head to see
what your personality is.
But it's a little
bit better than that.
There are a number
of brain states
which correlate with increased
mindfulness practice.
And those have been
measured in the lab.
And I've been wired
up to EEGs and put
in an MRI and stuff like that.
They've measured my brain too.
And what is that if you
were at the optimal state?
Would it be more alpha
waves or beta waves?
There's a lot of
different-- some of it
has to do with decrease in
different regions of the brain,
in different parts of the brain.
So it's less about more
alpha, less alpha, and more
about which regions of the brain
are being activated by stimuli.
So if you can interrupt
the stimulus response,
loop in different places.
So that's where a
lot of the focus it.
I think a lot of the
stuff on brain waves
has to do with state
rather than stage.
And states are cool.
They're great.
And you and I have both had a
lot of interesting experiences
with different mind states.
But they don't transform.
They don't liberate
in the same way
that really shifting the brain
and upgrading the brain does.
One thing you
brought up in the book
is this idea that, could one
be enlightened and yet still be
quite fallible in human terms,
potentially sex obsessed, drug
addicted, or fascinated by
all sorts of distractions,
and be what goes under
the term "enlightened."
Can you explain what
your thoughts are there?
Well, that's
happened historically.
And one of the shadow sides
of the dharma in the West
has been the meeting of
Western libertinism with a very
authoritarian, traditional
structure from Japan
in particular, because
mostly Zen masters who
have received their
certificates of enlightenment,
which is kind of nice.
You get a certificate.
You can frame it and
put it on your wall,
but then go on to
abuse alcohol or abuse
their students, female
and male students,
in very exploitative
sexual ways.
So it's not just
about, I think we
have a kind of
Judeo-Christian frame
that that's somehow sinful.
It's not about that.
It's actually just about
exploiting people and making
people's lives
really unhappy when
what you're meant to
be doing, of course,
is reducing suffering.
So that's actually
happened historically.
And it just seems clear that
there are different axes
of human development.
There's an ethical
axis and there's
a spiritual or
contemplative axis,
whatever you want to call it.
And you can be very
advanced in one,
but still an emotional infant.
It calls to mind some of
the ideas of Slavoj Zizek,
that interesting
political post-Marxist
critic who believes that--
Not what I thought you were
going to pull out right now.
Really?
He talks about how,
in his perspective,
Asiatic New Age
thought has actually
become the dominant, underlying
paradigm of postmodern
capitalism, because it
allows people to continue
to participate in a
system that they know
is destructive and
mechanistic yet feel
a kind of inner sense of
non-attachment or detachment
from it.
Yeah, I think where the rubber
hits the road is like, well,
how is it actually playing out?
And there are certainly
narcissistic Buddhist and Hindu
and yoga practitioners
out there.
There's also a whole movement
called Engaged Buddhism.
And my view is that a lot of
the negative, narcissistic stuff
that has come with
spirituality is really
a function of the Boomer
generation more than anything
else, frankly.
And most of the younger
practitioners who I know
tend to be actually very
highly socially engaged.
Personally-- you asked
about my biography earlier.
One of the things that
maybe is different about me
and a lot of other folks who
are doing this kind of practice
is that I have a day job.
I'm a professional activist and
I work for an LGBT foundation
and we do a lot of work
all around the world.
And right after
this conversation,
we're going to go have
another meeting about Russia
and the situation there.
So I think that's actually
more common among a younger
generation of practitioners.
And how do you feel when we
look at potentially the largest
crisis humanity faces being
the ecological crisis,
how do you feel that these
types of contemplative fitness
practices intersect with
level of structural problems
that our post-industrial
civilization has unleashed?
Yeah, the question is, where's
the level of the problem?
It clearly does not
intersect in a meaningful way
in changing and fixing the
deep structures of society.
But on another scale, it does
work on an individual level,
I think, in my experience.
What are all these
technologies of amusement
and distraction for?
Well, they're for
amusement and distraction,
to kind of be not satisfied
with what there is,
but actually, well, I have that
thing over there, if I do this
or if I can have
this activity or I
can buy this bigger house
or something like that,
I'll feel better.
So at a very basic level,
the worst case scenario,
if your practice doesn't lead
to liberation and enlightenment,
at least there's,
like, one less jerk
in the world who is able to
live a little bit more lightly.
And that, I think, is kind
of the worst case scenario.
You can go up from
there to really see
the operations of greed,
hatred, and delusion
in every aspect of our life.
You talked in
the book about how
one way to look at it is
that in the '50s and '60s,
the dharma in the
Western context
was in a kind of
infantile state, then
became into like
a childlike state.
And now it's in a kind
of adolescent state.
What do you think that
means in terms of what
would be the adult state?
I think for me-- who knows,
predicting the future.
But I think adulthood
and maturity would
be a somewhat more rational,
almost dispassionate
understanding of the power
and the dangers of some
of these practices,
seeing these practices
as technologies,
as tools which can
be used for good, also for ill.
You can practice concentration
and become a better warrior.
And I think it's a really
interesting question.
There's still a notion of
adolescent experimentation,
I think, in this
phase of the dharma's
progression and evolution.
And I think we
don't even yet know,
"we" being the larger culture,
some of what's out there.
Are these altered
states which you
can get into through
concentration practice
that are really incredible.
And I've entered a
lot of cool states.
But these things really
take the cake, I mean,
just surrounded and bathed
by universal life and love.
And two days later,
you're still a jerk.
So I think that's really
a powerful lesson in what
changes us and what doesn't.
So the future of
the dharma would
be non-jerky enlightenment.
-I hope so.
Awesome.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
So we'll be right back
with Richard Smoley.
ANNOUNCER: Ever
since he was a child,
Richard Smoley has held a
fascination for the spiritual,
to the point where a great
aunt of his, who happened
to be a nun, told them he was
maybe thinking a little too
much about religion.
This didn't deter him,
however, and he went out
to study at Harvard,
where he worked
on the university's
literary magazines,
the "Harvard Advocate."
From there, he went
on to study at Oxford,
where he edited "The
Pelican," and most
importantly, was introduced
to the philosophies
of the Kabbalah.
In 1999, he released
his first book,
"Hidden Wisdom: A Guide to
the Western Inner Traditions."
Since then, he's written
"The Essential Nostradamus,"
"Conscious Love: Insights from
Mystical Christianity," "Inner
Christianity: A Guide to the
Esoteric Tradition," "Forbidden
Faith: the Secret
History of Agnosticism,"
and "The Dice Game of
Shiva: How Consciousness
Creates the Universe."
He is considered one of the
world's foremost authorities
on mystical and
esoteric teachings
of Western civilization.
[APPLAUSE]
Thanks very much.
Pleasure to be here.
Really happy you
could join us today.
So tell us a little bit
about who is Richard Smoley.
Well, I ended up as a writer
on the mystical and spiritual
traditions, mostly of the West.
And that came about,
oh, about 25 years ago,
when I was in the middle
a career shift in my life.
And I thought, well, why
not write about subjects
that I found were of interest?
So I started writing
to various magazines
that were around in those days.
Were you already practicing
some kind of mystical bent?
What was your particular bent?
Well, I started out
working with Kabbalah,
which is a Jewish
tradition, but this
was in a non-Jewish context.
It was a small group at Oxford
University, strangely enough.
And I found this group
quite by accident
at the freshman's fair,
various activities
and that kind of thing.
And I became drawn to it.
And I went to the group
for a couple of years
and am still in touch
with many of the people
who were connected with it.
But that was the beginning
of my spiritual voyage.
I moved to San
Francisco in 1980.
And I started
working with things
like a course in miracles,
which is a channel text,
allegedly by Jesus
Christ, and whether do
you believe that or not, it's
still a very powerful text.
Do you believe it?
I don't know.
There would be no way of
proving it one way or the other.
But if it were typed
out by a bunch of chimps
on keyboards in a
room, it would still
be a profound spiritual text.
And how did you get
introduced to theosophy?
They hired me for a job.
I had been in this
field for a long time,
and they contacted me
about eight years ago
to start editing Quest
Books, which is the imprint
of the Theosophical Society.
And we can talk a little
more about what theosophy is.
That was going to
be-- what is theosophy
and why is it still interesting?
Well, theosophy is
a movement started
by a Russian mystic
named H.P. Blovotsky
in the late 19th century.
And the Theosophical Society was
founded by Blovotsky and others
in 1875 in the West
40s in New York.
And it's become one of the most
influential spiritual groups
in the last 100 years, even
though no one has heard of it.
And one thing it did--
it did many things.
But one thing it did was
promote a lot of Eastern ideas
and a lot of Eastern concepts
in the West, some of which
are pretty much mainstream now.
Karma-- many people
know what karma is.
It was a totally esoteric
idea 100 years ago.
And Blovotsky claimed that she
was given a lot of information
by hidden masters--
She did.
No one knows who they were.
Some people claimed they
were completely fraudulent
and that she made
the whole thing up.
I don't think it's
quite that simple.
I don't think she made it up.
I think they were real.
I think there was a
lot of hagiography done
around her and around them.
But I think the core
of the story is true.
And their ideas and
teachings became part of what
became known as theosophy.
And a lot of its ideas became
very, very influential.
One-- I'm not a
vegetarian myself,
but the theosophists
were among the first
to promote vegetarianism in
a really big way in the West.
And it was still very
outre when they did.
And the theosophists
were also very active
at a very early stage in
promoting Indian independence.
The Theosophical Society
moved to India in 1878.
And very soon after it became
active in, little by little,
pushing India
toward independence
from the British Raj.
And Annie Bessett, who
was one of the presidents
of the Theosophical Society,
was very influential
and influenced Gandhi.
She thought Gandhi was a
little too confrontational.
But she was definitely
part of that movement.
And so theosophy is-- as
little known as it is-- there
are 3,300 members in the US.
As little-known as it
is, it's been quite
powerful, very influential.
Let's talk about a
few of your titles.
One of your books is
"Inner Christianity."
Can you talk a little bit
about what that book's about?
Yeah, well, it's about the
esoteric and mystical side
of Christianity, that is
to say beyond the dogma
and beyond the theology, a
lot of which is pretty hollow.
And a lot of it is Christianity
as a form of inner experience
and as a guide to
inner experience.
What is the kingdom of heaven?
It's all told about in parable.
It's never really overtly said.
The kingdom of heaven is
within you, not by the way,
among you, as many modern
translations would have it.
And it is, I would
say, it's that in you
which says I. There's
something in you that says I.
The Hindus would call it atman.
And you can go in,
and you can never
see this I, right, because
it's always going to be,
what's seeing?
So Saint Francis of
Assisi said, what you're
looking for is what is looking.
And inner Christianity
is about that.
It's about the different
states of experience,
about the different
levels of consciousness
and how these are symbolized
in Christianity and the Bible.
Those things were not meant to
be taken literally originally.
There was a church father
named Origin who said,
in the third century,
"who is so stupid
as to think God planted
a garden somewhere
in the East like some farmer?"
No, these actually point
to certain mysteries.
And then he went on to
say, even the Gospels
aren't entirely historical.
They also have an
esoteric meaning.
And have we found out now?
Well, we found out that
there was no garden of Eden,
as we know it.
A lot of things Jesus supposedly
said and did, he didn't do.
There's an esoteric
meaning to it.
This was never
completely lost, but it
has been very heavily buried.
I guess you explore
this in another book
you wrote about gnosticism.
So inner Christianity-- in terms
of Western esoteric tradition
over the last few centuries,
I've studied a lot of Rudolf
Steiner more than theosophists.
But there's a sense
where Steiner would argue
that despite, in some ways,
Christianity seeming maybe
to our modern perspective,
a little aggressive compared
to Buddhism or the
contemplative practices,
the contemplative fitness that
Jay discusses, that there's
some core Christianity which is
still an evolutionary necessity
or an advance over previous
spiritual traditions, in a way.
Do you understand
that in any sense?
I do.
I'm not a big fan of Steiner's,
just because I find his writing
kind of boring and
his ideas are sort of
a little cumbersome
for me, but he was
obviously a profound thinker.
It does point out one
of the differences
that people often
point to in Western
versus Eastern traditions.
The Western traditions of let's
say Judaism and Christianity
for the sake of
simplicity, say something
or attempt to say something
about the redemption
of the world.
That is to say, the world
is somehow in a broken state
and it needs to be
fixed or redeemed.
And particularly--
Reparation, right?
Isn't that the word in Kabbalah?
Yeah, it's tikun in Kabbalah.
And Eastern religions
are often criticized,
rightly or wrongly, for
being more about being
detached from the world.
Kind of fatalistic, in
a sense, in that world
is just going to
go on like this.
The individual human
has an opportunity
to get off the
wheel, but otherwise
the wheel just keeps on going.
I think you can be very
simplistic in saying one
is right and the other isn't.
I certainly in some ways feel
more personally sympathetic
with the Eastern point of
view, because sometimes--
just as emotional--
What about the whole
discovery or the kind of
thought stream in
the movement of
the technological singularity?
I don't know if you've you
look into Ray Kurzweil at all,
the technology-- in a way,
it's like the eschatology
and teleology of this
kind of Christian mindset
has somehow shifted into the
realm of engineering, this idea
that we're going to be able
to merge with machines,
reach a kind of a
mortal condition,
overcome all the constraints
of human beingness
through nanobots or so on.
Have you looked into that at
all or given that some thought?
As for thinking our
computers will do that for us.
I haven't looked
at it very much.
I'm aware of the general model.
I'm just viscerally
very, very suspicious
of something that's
going to posit
technology as our salvation.
Because technology has been
a rather unreliable savior
ever since the first steam
mill in 1770s England
was put together.
Life is in many ways better for
us than it was in those days.
But there have been
a lot of problems.
And to say, well,
there's a singularity
that's going to come where
all the technology is going
to converge and rescue
us from ourselves
strikes me as very dubious.
Let's talk a about
another book of yours
which I read recently
and really enjoyed,
was "The Dice Game of Shiva."
Can you kind of compress
that hypothesis a bit for us?
Well, the subtitle of the
book is "How Consciousness
Creates the Universe."
And one thing I do in it, which
I think is unusual and rare
is I actually come up with a
definition of consciousness
that's not completely circular.
I mean, you can find
this in the dictionary.
What's consciousness?
Well, it's awareness.
What's awareness?
Well, it's perception.
What's perception?
Well, it's consciousness.
The wheel goes on.
The way I'm presenting
it is that consciousness
is the capacity to
relate self and other.
There's a sense in some way or
another of a self and an other
that entails consciousness,
or consciousness entails.
There's a me here.
There's a you there.
That's very kind of--
How do you know?
Just kidding.
There's an I that's
experiencing something.
There's a presence or a witness
that's experiencing something.
And that I put it together
into a person that I call you,
may be kind of a secondary
structuring of experience.
But there's still this I that
perceives something in response
to something.
And my argument in the
book is that, well,
if you look at
consciousness this way,
you could see it as
underlying all the universe.
That is to say-- and Edison
said this in a 1890 interview
with Harper's Magazine.
He said all of these molecules
that interact with each other
in all these sorts
of ways, do you
mean to say they do this without
some kind of consciousness?
And to say that they
have introspective
consciousness like a
Woody Allen character,
no, they obviously don't.
But there is some capacity
to recognize and respond even
in kind of very basic things.
And our consciousness
is just a very
narrow bandwidth of
what is obviously
an enormous continuum.
So do your ideas
correlate with maybe
Frieda Capra's ideas
in the Tao of physics
or Amit Goswami's work in a way?
Yeah, I suppose so.
Amit's sort of big on quantum
theory and quantum activism
and that kind of thing.
The thing about quantum is that
as Heisenberg or somebody said,
if you think you
understand quantum theory,
you don't understand it.
Since I don't think
I understand it,
I don't know whether this
means I understand it or not,
but I'm pretty sure I
don't understand it.
In any case, I personally am
not that excited or interested
in using the quantum metaphor
particularly, although I don't
have any problem with
someone who knows
more about it than I do doing.
Well, if consciousness
kind of underlies reality
in some sense, is
it possible then
to think of there being kind
of like a purpose or a telos
to existence?
That's what Amit
Goswami draws on,
Aurobindo's ideas that somehow
consciousness is using material
and biology, matter in life,
to create more and more
sophisticated and
subtle representations
of itself that can
actually operate
in more domains dimensions.
Does that suggest that
maybe consciousness wants
to take another big upgrade?
Well, that idea also comes
back to theosophy, which started
to talk about the
evolution of consciousness
in the late 19th century.
And it was extended by
people like Teilhard
de Chardin in the 20th.
I guess the first answer
that comes to my mind
is the quote from the Rig
Veda-- "What is all this?
Where it all come from?
Only the highest
god in heaven knows.
Or what if he doesn't know?"
That was written 1200 BC.
We're still in that situation.
All of these things, to my
mind, are interesting ideas
to contemplate and work with.
But I think there's
a point at which
you just have to say, yeah, it
could be, and leave it at that.
If the mind fixes on
a definite answer,
it becomes a little god.
It becomes an idol.
And as the spiritual teacher
G.I. Gurdjieff once so
wisely said, "sooner or
later it all ends in people
breaking one another's heads."
But on the other
hand, you would
say that knowledge keeps
evolving and advancing also,
right?
We're learning more in
different dimensions.
I mean, even with
Jay, he was talking
about knowledge of how
contemplative practices really
impact the brain.
That's new information.
Yeah, well, of
course, the historians
talk about the whig
view of history,
which is one of progress.
And is that another
version of that?
I personally see progress as a
very dynamic and fluid thing.
There are things
that are advancing
and there are things
that are regressing.
Our capacity to control
the natural world
is certainly greater than
it was 100 years ago.
Our sense of integration
and connection
with the natural
world is much feebler
probably than it's
been any civilization
that we've ever heard of.
That could also
be a transition.
Like the guy Owen Barfield
talked about a transition
from the original
participation of people
in aboriginal cultures to
having to go through a passage
of separation and alienation,
so there would be another form
of participation that he
called final participation,
which would be a
consciously kind
of comprehended whole in a way.
I'm going to ask you a bit about
the history of the New Age,
because obviously theosophy
was at the dawn of that.
And you you've written very
interesting-- in your new book
The Supernatural" you talk about
your intellectual relationship
to the New Age in a way and
how you see that history.
Can you elaborate on
that a little bit?
Well, you could say the New
Age started in 1757, which
is a rather odd year to pick.
But it was the year that
the Swedish visionary
Emanuel Swedenborg said was
the year of the Last Judgment.
And Swedenborg said, this is
not going to happen on Earth.
No one on Earth is
going to be aware of it.
He described it as a kind
of spiritual housecleaning
in the spirit world.
And he wrote these enormous,
and often extremely tedious
volumes explicating the Bible
and his visions and so on.
These were incredibly
influential
in the 19th century.
That would be a whole
subject in itself.
But the reason I bring it up is
that a Swedenborgian minister
named Warren Felt
Evans in 1863 published
a book called "The New
Age and its Messenger."
And that was really the
first time to my knowledge
that the New Age was used
in that kind of sense.
So Swedenborg kind of
kicked this idea open.
And one of the
things he said was
that a lot of the old religious
forms are going to be discarded
and there's going to
be a new, shall we say,
porousness between
the spiritual world,
the visible world-- the
visible and invisible worlds.
And this idea seeped
into our culture
and is very much
part of our milieu.
Evans was a disciple of
another man named Quimby, who
came up with the
idea that you could
heal yourself by your thoughts.
Though power is
what healed people.
He said, I just
change people's minds.
He was a New England doctor.
Everybody in those days
could call themselves
a doctor if they wanted.
And he was a great healer.
People came to
him from all over.
And his ideas were
incredibly powerful.
Mary Baker Eddy, founder
of Christian Science,
is one of his disciples.
And this became a thing
called New Thought, which
is the idea that your
mind affects reality,
that you can change reality
just by your thinking
is one of the key ideas of
the New Thought movement--
Which brings us to "The
Secret" today and what
we know and so on.
Exactly, "The Secret" in 2006.
Every decade there's
a new bestseller,
marketing this particular idea.
Deepak Chopra, the laws
of spiritual success.
Exactly.
And what would
be your critique?
How do you look at
that idea from a more
empirical perspective?
I'd say a couple of things.
One, to be rather mystical
about it for a minute,
I would say that there
is a level of the mind,
of consciousness, where
to think something
it literally to make it happen.
I also think this
level of the mind,
which I'm saying we all
have, is very, very,
very, very heavily defended.
Why?
Because think of your thoughts
of the last two minutes.
Do you want every
one of those things
to become palpable reality?
So in that sense, yeah,
there's a level of the mind
that really can create reality.
What's your reason for
believing that that's the case?
One or two little experiences.
But the other thing
I would say also
is that even at a more
mundane level, yeah,
our thoughts do create reality.
But our thoughts are
also very confused
and very contradictory.
So in order to have
the mental focus
to actually affect reality
through your thoughts
is no small thing.
And we do create the
world with our thoughts,
in a literal sense.
Our thoughts are confused.
Our world is confused.
Our thoughts are a
mixture of good and evil,
if you want to use those terms.
The world is a mixture
of good and evil.
So in terms of
that confusion, how
do you see New Age
constructs around aliens,
extraterrestrials,
ancient aliens, Atlantis,
[INAUDIBLE], all the stuff?
Well, each of those is a
big topic in its own right.
With aliens and
extraterrestrials,
in 1957 C.G. Jung wrote a little
essay called "Flying Saucers"
in which he said-- he talked
about the psychological
implications, came down to it.
People are seeing something.
We don't know what it is.
And we're not really the
very far past that now.
He also thought that those
saucers represented a shift
in the nature of the psyche.
And part of the coming
to consciousness
or coming to
self-realization of humanity.
He did.
I'm interested in also a
somewhat literal sense.
I mean, something fell down
a neighborhood in Norfolk,
Virginia a couple of
weeks ago and everybody
was pulled out of the area.
The g-men came in.
They hauled this
mysterious thing away.
And of course, they
ended up ruling
that it was a weather balloon.
It's always a weather balloon.
I wrote a book about
UFOs a couple years ago
which had interviews or
articles with the heads
of the Belgian and
Brazilian air forces,
who are not, at least
ostensibly, crackpots.
And they said, our guys
are seeing something.
We wish the Americans would
tell us what's going on.
They're not.
So I think there's
something there.
Maybe the government
knows something.
Maybe it doesn't.
95% of UFO sightings
are weather balloons.
They're clouds.
They're satellites.
It's the 5% that aren't
that are very weird.
Atlantis-- there's
no reason Atlantis--
the story of Atlantis
could not be true,
and many reasons that
it could be true.
According to Plato, whose
dialogues, the Timaeus
and the Kritias are
the first discussions
of Atlantis, how
literally played
[INAUDIBLE] is a subject.
But according to
Plato, who said,
this is from the Egyptians
who kept records.
Atlanta sank in 9600 BC.
Well, hey, that was just around
the end of the last Ice Age.
And we know that at the
end of the last Ice Age,
there was a lot of land that had
been formally above sea level
that was now under sea level.
So there's no scientific
reason to believe
that a civilization like
Atlantis couldn't have existed.
And it fits in well with
perfectly conventional science.
Whether Atlantic
had all of these--
whether it was kind of like--
sometimes it's portrayed
as almost like something
in a 1938 science
fiction movie or something--
There's the hypothesis that has
been developed that there was
more contact with
extraterrestrial civilizations,
energy devices, or
types of technologies
that were being used.
That could be.
It is possible-- and this is the
thing that strikes me as most
likely if you want to use words
like this in this context--
that the story of Atlantis
is a story of a civilization
achieved a fairly
high level of capacity
in, shall we say,
the thought power we
were just talking about.
Technologically, it may
have been very primitive.
So if you dug up Atlantis,
you wouldn't necessarily find
huge Greek temples underwater.
You might not notice anything.
But it could be that they had
these very, very high levels
of psychic development,
as is sometimes said,
and that they destroyed
themselves with it.
It's almost like a Amazonian
shamanic culture that
potentially has these
psychic capacities
but exists on a very
low material level.
And as I understand it in some
Native American traditions,
there are legends
of civilizations
on these continents
that destroyed
each other through sorcery.
So then ultimately, I guess,
when we get to the New Age,
for you that's maybe just
a rubric or a way of making
a general statement
or whatever around all
these different
phenomena that are
still at the edge of the
contemporary world view,
or a little beyond our
capacity to fully access.
Yeah.
I think a lot of them are ways
of stretching our imagination.
And the literal truth of a lot
of them, you can argue about.
But there's something
to be said about making
the human mind
contemplate possibilities
that it normally doesn't.
We normally just see
what's ahead of us--
the bills, the
family, the mortgage,
the job are the only reality.
And a lot of these New Age
visions are ways of saying,
this is just part
of the picture.
This is just part
What do you think, taking
that as a keynote, what
you think America's going to be
like in, say, 50 or 100 years?
What kind of development
are we going to see?
Well, I'll narrow the
time frame a little bit.
I would say this.
The next 10 years-- if I'm
going to make prophecies,
and everybody else does,
so why shouldn't I?
You wrote the book
on Nostradamus.
Yeah, I don't believe
his prophecies.
That's another story.
I believe in the US the next 10
years will be an age of reform,
kind of like the age of
reform around the turn
of the 20th century.
If that doesn't happen, the
10 years after that I believe
will be an age of blood.
Beyond that, I cannot say.
But I mean--
When does the dancing start?
I don't know.
Maybe after the age of blood.
But there's huge dislocations.
There are huge injustices.
There are huge
problems in society.
And the society is
basically at an impasse.
Something has to give, and if
something doesn't give gently
now, the next five to
10 years, if, shall we
say, if we don't take a little
bit more from the 1%, well,
in Russia the 1%
just wouldn't give.
So 100 years ago,
they killed them all
or drove them out
of the country.
Didn't make things
better in the long run.
But that was a thing.
It was a dam that finally burst.
And I find myself wondering if
that's not what we're seeing
in the next 10, 20 years.
And how does what you've
learned and studied through all
your esoteric
scholarship and so on
influence your view of what our
capacities are for the future?
I think the capacities that we
have to develop most urgently
and most critically
are ethical capacities.
And a lot of this
is just nothing
more than ordinary common
sense and human decency,
such that I would
imagine most, if not
everyone here in this
audience would agree on.
It's just that we're locked into
this competitiveness, this view
that I'm not ahead unless
I step on someone else.
And this has gotten
so out of control
and the society is so
hypnotized by it that that
has to be the next step.
I mean, I'm certainly
all for mindfulness
and meditation and
expanding consciousness
in a cognitive sense.
But the real urgency
is an ethical sense.
Cool.
I think that's about
our time for today,
and I really appreciate
you being here with us
and thank you so
much for sharing
your voluminous knowledge.
[APPLAUSE]
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck back
here with "Mindshift"
with Jay Michaelson
and Richard Smoley.
And welcome to
this conversation.
Kind of promised myself
I would, in the future,
do few all white, Western
men panel discussions,
but here we are nonetheless,
so let's just roll with it.
OK, so let's talk
about these devotional,
Western theocratic traditions.
Why at this point
would anybody who's
more interested in
evolutionary spirituality,
or evolutionary
consciousness even
take them seriously or consider
them as a meaningful path?
Well that's a good question.
I would say that from a
personal point of view,
God or the divine is probably
not ultimately personal.
Because that would
be just too small
a God to create everything
that we know about
and everything that
we don't know about.
But in this infinite
capacity of the divine
or whatever you want to call
it, brahman, it has the capacity
to relate to us
personally, because we're
out of this as persons.
We exist as persons.
Now, I realize that's not
entirely what a Buddhist would
say, because a
Buddhist would say
that the person is an illusion.
But we experience
ourselves as persons.
And the divine can relate to
us in a personal sort of way
out of its, shall we
say, infinite capacity
for action and variety.
That may not be ultimately true.
I suspect it isn't
ultimately true,
but that potentiality
is within it.
Yeah, I think it's
almost a form of hedonism.
There's something
about the variety
of contemplative
experiences that I
find incredibly appealing.
And like Lou Reed said,
"some kinds of love,
the possibilities are endless."
For me to miss one would
seem to be groundless.
And whether it's cutting off
an indigenous, polytheistic,
shamanically inflected
form of consciousness,
or cutting off a
contemplative consciousness
or cutting off a theistic one
feels like feels like a loss.
And I think we could ask
the same question of,
why deal with poetry when
we have plenty of prose?
Cool.
So another question
that Richard raised
was this whole idea
of mindfulness,
which we were discussing
in our previous talk,
and whether that could actually
be used against us, almost
to turn people into more
productive and consumptive
units of a society
that's ultimately
a little bit soulless.
I'm curious if that's
something you ever thought.
That's fascinating.
I actually talked to
Jon Kabat Zinn, who's
probably the leading
popularizer of mindfulness
about exactly that.
And he had taught
mindfulness at Goldman Sachs
and did actually
say, I think you're
kind of missing the point.
If you're really
doing your practice,
you need to see the
consequences of your actions
and you need to own
it and not deny it.
At the same time, it's
absolutely the case
that this technology is a
kind of transparent one.
And in the traditional
wrapper, it's
always been together
with virtuous conduct
and ethical reflection.
And so there's always been
a notion that you can't just
have the contemplative
practice, but that there
has to be something
else with it,
the relational and the ethical.
I guess it reminds
me how in the Amazon,
we've taken the
idea of the shaman
and we've made into a
construction of the healer
and the positive visionary.
But actually,
throughout the Amazon,
people who gain higher
levels of knowledge
are also more dangerous.
The boundary between
sorcerer and shaman
is kind of a loose
one, in a way.
That's true.
Well, the other thing that
these traditions always teach
is that greater
levels of capacity
incur greater levels
of responsibility.
And if one is not
accompanied by the other,
then something is going to
go wrong, because then you
end up manipulating people to
do whatever you want them to do.
And there's a great deal of
concern about black magic,
saying like the fundamentalist
Christian community.
But as we all know, mass media
and advertising and marketing
are forms of black magic
that are much more pervasive
than some guy drawing
an upside down
pentagram in his little studio.
I like the way you said,
as we all know there.
I think we know that.
There's this notion I started
out-- before getting serious
about my Buddhist
dharma practice,
I started out in the
Jewish mystical tradition.
And I've done a fair amount of
scholarly work in that field.
And there's a lot
of notion there,
a lot of conceptions of
preparatory practices,
like what do you
have to do first?
And basically, the summary of
it is you need to be grounded.
And you need to be in
relationship with other people.
Because you can get very
ungrounded and we've seen
that actually happen.
And I think it's that separation
of these different strands,
just like you pointed out.
The shaman isn't just a healer
who visits other realms.
The shaman's also integrated
into a communal structure,
a societal structure and
a cosmological structure.
And I think one of
the joys of being
in our postmodern
contemplative marketplace
is we can pick and choose.
But obviously, we do
that at out peril also.
I want to talk to you guys
a little bit about a subject
that's of great interest to me,
as you might imagine, prophecy
and what your perspective
is from your studies
and so on in thinking about
what is the place of prophecy?
What's the utility of it?
And did you find any
value in the prophecies
around the end of
the Mayan calendar,
that we just passed through that
threshold over the last year
or so.
One thing I found very
interesting about it is that,
at least many forms
of it, took somewhat
a Christian, apocalyptic,
Judeo-Christian
apocalyptic form.
And this has certainly been
going on for 2000 years.
Practically every
year in the last 2000
is predicted to be the end
of the world by somebody.
But what was
interesting about this--
and whatever you want to say
about the 2012 phenomenon,
that, to some degree, the Judeo
Christian apocalyptic habit
was suddenly brought
in to justify
or be justified by
a native tradition
that's non-Judeo-Christian.
To me, it shows that the
Judeo-Christian mindset
is losing its grip.
And that's not the only
reason that I say that.
But I think it's
one lesson one can
draw from the 2012 phenomenon.
I think that's right,
and at the same time,
there's something almost endemic
to the human condition that
leads us toward millennialism,
that leads us to have this view
that it's the end of
the world as we know it,
whether we feel fine or not.
And I actually did some
graduate work on a false Messiah
in the 18th century, who kind
of predicted again that the end
of the world is nigh.
And it seems to just
be a recurring pattern.
What I found fascinating
about the 2012 phenomenon
was that it was true,
exactly as you said.
Outside of the
traditional frames,
these patterns of thought get
replicated, as they sometimes
do in radical Islam,
as they sometimes
do in hypercapitalism,
as they do in fascism,
and as they do in socialism.
This messianic impulse or
this millennial impulse
seems to be one which exists
even in secular contexts.
So if 2012
represented an aspect
of this millennial
consciousness,
which is very natural to
humans, because we're projecting
our own individual fate
on the fate of the cosmos,
or on the fate of the
world, what you guys
think happens after we die?
I think something goes on.
There are three possibilities--
nothing goes on,
you go onto a state
of reality that's
either better or
worse than this one,
or you come back here again.
Those are the three
possibilities.
So you have atheism/
agnosticism,
you have the traditional
Abrahamic or at any rate
Christian and Islamic
view of one life,
and then the third is a more
Eastern view of reincarnation.
My own view is quite simple.
What if all of
those are possible?
What if, for whatever reason, in
your life in your own evolution
if you want to call it that,
maybe you need to come back.
Maybe you go on.
That was kind of
addressed very well
in that-- I thought
it was very good film
called "Offending your Life."
It came out, like, 20 years ago.
The whole thing is, like,
does this guy have to go back
or has he graduated to going on?
I thought there was a
lot of wisdom in that.
I have almost no idea.
I think for me--
Even after all your studies
and work in Kabbalah?
I can tell you what
Kabbalists think about it.
But you asked what
I think about it.
I think to me the most
persuasive account
is to really even
question what the self
is, in a sort of Buddhist way.
And if you think about the
way that reincarnation was
interpreted in some
Buddhist understandings,
it's almost like when
a cue ball hits a bunch
of other balls on a pool table.
So there is something about that
cue ball that's been preserved,
the momentum and the direction
and all those kinds of forces.
But obviously, it's not
the cue ball itself.
The cue ball was this vessel
or this body that was around
for some period of
time that created all
these forces, karma, whatever.
And those do seem to have
an impact in the world.
That's about as far
as I'm willing to go.
Otherwise, I assume it's over.
It raises the question of
what, for me, is just about
the most mysterious
thing in the universe,
which is causation itself.
Because in the Western
philosophic tradition,
in case people didn't know
this, causation is like totally
mysterious and inexplicable.
Causation had been
permitted to survive
as a concept in
philosophy because,
like the British monarchy,
it had been erroneously
believed to do no harm.
And whether that's right or not,
it just shows how problematic--
What do you mean
exactly by causation?
Just drill in a
little second there.
Well, what actually
makes something a cause
and what makes
something an effect?
Now, the Eastern view, which
we categorize somewhat crudely
as karma, posits
that a given cause
produces an effect like itself.
That is to say, a good cause
produces a good effect.
A bad cause produces
a bad effect.
Western science
is a little more--
Until you would
attain some type
of enlightenment, in
which case that doesn't
really function anymore.
You're just done
making effects.
You're finished with that.
It's a going out of a
candle, is the metaphor
that's actually used.
But it is really kind of a
mystery of why actually-- we
take it obviously completely for
granted that the laws of nature
are what they are and
causes lead to effects.
That's like Rupert
Sheldrake had the whole idea
that the laws of nature are more
like patterns or habits that
become more coherent over time.
But actually they could
always be changed.
It is remarkable
that even what we
think of as the
laws of our being
seem to be subject to change.
And what is your perspective?
So in terms of Western
esotericism-- Kabbalah,
Judaism, Christianity,
gnosticism--
what do you see the future
is for these traditions?
Do you people will still be
practicing in the same way
in 20 or 50 years?
I think one thing that's
interesting in contemporary
mysticism, mystical practice,
is that it's heavily influenced
by a certain kind of
psychedelic experience, which
is a unit of psychedelic
experience such as the ones
that are available
on LSD and mushrooms
and similar substances.
Non-substance based.
There's an experience
that a lot of folks had,
using these medicines,
of oceanic consciousness
or something unit of like that.
And then they
looked for and found
echoes of that with mystical
and contemplative traditions.
I think what's shifting now
is as different medicines are
becoming better known,
different kinds of experiences
are becoming better known--
visionary experiences.
You mentioned prophecy earlier.
And correspondingly, there
seems to be an increase in some
of the more gnostic and
the more esoteric elements
of the Western
contemplative traditions,
which have more to do
with visionary experience
and more to do with
complexity rather than unity.
And I think that's
actually a really
interesting shift,
and one that's just
beginning to filter through.
Yeah, there was a
20th century Russian
Orthodox saint who
said, Christianity
still in its infancy.
And this may sound very
mysterious, because it looks as
if the Christian
institutions are caving in,
which in many ways
they deserve to do.
But a lot of the
values of Christianity
and the core values of
the other world religions
are very much like it, are still
very much in their infancy.
As we saw a couple weeks ago,
the pope made an announcement,
who am I to judge gay people?
And you literally
saw the headlines--
"Pope Acts Like Christian--
World in Shock."
So there's a long way to
go even with very basic
ethical principles and practices
that we all pay lip service to,
but the world still isn't
taking too seriously.
What about in terms
of-- in the New Age
culture over the
last 40 years, we've
seen an eruption of alternative
worldviews, models and so on.
What's your perspective
on the value of that
or where that may go.
Is it actually a useful
stream that's going
to influence the mainstream?
It does and it has.
Karma and reincarnation were
two very, very esoteric ideas.
I worked for the
Theosophical Society,
and theosophy introduced
that into the Western world
in the late 19th century.
It's been given
some good backing
by Ian Stevenson's work,
right, where reincarnation
and biology intersect.
Didn't he find many,
many past life,
spontaneous past life
recall in early childhood,
where these children
would remember exactly
who they'd been in a past life.
And he even traced them back,
take them to those villages
and find correlations
and correspondences.
That's true.
That's all interesting.
But reincarnation is
now, as far as polls say,
believed in by 21% to
28% of the US populace.
There was one thing that said
25% of American Catholics
believe in reincarnation.
So this is very much part
of the mainstream now,
and it's not going to go away.
And I think maybe a
little more prosaic,
but I think equally
powerful, has
been the pragmatic orientation
of some of the New Age stuff.
So, does it work?
What does it lead to?
What's the experience?
So at its extreme,
that again collapses
into a kind of narcissism,
what does it do for me?
But I think in a more
interesting and reflective
vein, it really
puts us back, puts
the experiencer
and the experience
back into the center.
And if traditional religious
containers aren't delivering
the goods, whether it's
spiritual or ethical
or whatever else,
they're not durable.
They're not going to last.
And I think that shift,
that shift to pragmatism,
is a really powerful one.
-Awesome.
Listen, thank you so much.
I think we've run out
of time for today,
but it was great to
have you, and look
forward to more conversations
and discursions in the future.
-It's a pleasure.
-Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]